---

date: 2006-03-09 03:17:10+00:00
title: Some thoughts on privately-delivered healthcare
---

There has been a flurry of activity in the Canadian healthcare sphere lately, with announcements from Quebec and Alberta of changes to the existing publicly-insured system.  The overarching problem is that as the population ages, more people (proportionally) will need surgeries like tumour removal, hip replacement, and cataract repair.  Alberta's plan is to expand the role of both privately-delivered care (in the form of private, for profit clinics), as well as some degree of private funding (insurance) to pay for this scheme.  To be clear, there has always been a high degree of privately delivered care in Canada -- X-Ray clinics, all doctors, physiotherapy, homecare, etc.

Will shifting to a more mixed model of privately funded care improve the system?  Let's assume that the system is improved if the median waiting time (not anecdotal horror stories) is reduced. And let's focus on hip and knee replacements as a case study.

Assume we move to a mixed model of delivery. That is, a surgeon-provider can deliver care outside the publicly managed system (that is, he can charge a floating rate, and isn't reimbursed by the provincial health plan). To be realistic, it is likely that he will be forced to work at least some part of his hours in the public system. The usual objection is that by doing this, he removes some portion of his service from the public queue (which is by and large based on need). However, it isn't clear that there isn't unused excess capacity. I think it likely that many surgeons desire increased operating room hours. There are also operating rooms that sit idle outside the hours of 9-4 Mon-Fri (save for emergencies). So given a sufficient amount of incentive (cash) that capacity could be used*. The hospital with the staff and infrastructure could rent it out to the surgeon, the surgeon could charge the patient for that cost, plus his time and profit. The patient would be covered by a private health plan.
So where's the harm?  I see two problems. One is that this plan essentially kills the universality of the Canada Health Act.  Those who could afford it could be treated out of proportion to their need. Health insurers would almost certainly skim the healthiest patients off the top, leaving the public system to operate (at a steep loss) on the very sickest, most complex cases (currently, hospitals can make some money off easy cases, and use that to subsidize the more difficult ones -- based on provincial funding).

Secondly, it isn't clear that the overall waiting time for knee replacement would be reduced. A surgeon may clear out a number of people with pressing issues within a year or two.  After that, he would have to hunt around to find more candidates. Advertising would be rolled out to emphasize the importance of new knees. The threshold for replacing knees would move lower and lower (and if you don't agree, what about all the needless cosmetic surgery that occurs - for a similarly risky procedure).

Finally, although you might think this would be revenue-neutral for the government, this seems unlikely, at least long-term. Let's assume that there is private health insurance to pay for these private surgeries. The public system would have to pay less in the short term to operate on these individuals - individuals, and the insurance plan, would bear the cost. However, as I mentioned, these people would be the healthiest, cheapest surgical candidates anyway (certainly the insurance plan isn't operating at a loss). In net terms, they probably aren't that expensive to treat, unlike, for example, an older homeless woman with schizophrenia and renal failure, who also needs a new knee). The real problem comes a few years down the line. Now these privately insured citizens -- almost certainly among the wealthier, more powerful members of society -- start to question why they continue to pay such high levels of taxation, AND a health insurance premium.  There is strong pressure on the government to reduce tax loads.  Furthermore, those least able to advocate are stuck in a system that is under-funded (although adequately staffed, I believe).  The result is a detrioration of the public system.  This is the result that [Andrew Coyne fears](http://andrewcoyne.com/2006/03/path-of-least-resistance.php), a worst-of-both-worlds approach.
The bottom line in health care funding is simple. People are aging, and older people need more healthcare. Ultimately, unless we are willing to leave the poorest people to die in the streets, society has to pay - we all have to pay, somehow, whether through taxes or premiums. The only decision is who gets the money at the end of the day, and who pays them.

* The only reason the public system doesn't do this now is that it would bankrupt us to fund that many surgeries (rationing).
