---

date: 2006-05-15 23:35:56+00:00
title: mesh day 1
---

Some thoughts on the day...

Enjoyed the two keynotes (Om Malik and Michael Geist). They did a good job of introducing some of the themes of the conference.  That said, I'd really like to hear more from both at a more detailed level -- the technical details, for example.  One question might be, What are some of the obstacles to Australian-style copyright exemptions in Canada?

I found the 15 minutes of fame a strange event. I think the idea is fine, but why not demo-Camp style?  What we got instead were meandering blurbs on the respective companies. And that Frank pitch was totally bizarre.  I mean, I get the post-modernism, but it just sounded a lot like ["I am not Jack's overpriced Ikea furniture"](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0137523/).

Next up was a discussion on politics (Canadian) and blogging. Panelists were Andrew Coyne, Paul Wells, some guy from the Ignatieff campaign, and Warren Kinsella.  I was sort of disappointed in Kinsella - I thought he was more fiery. I think his role as moderator neutered him (he was a great moderator, however). Several interesting remarks at this one. My favorite was Wells saying that any newspaper whose model is opinionated pundits shrieking at you is doomed, since blogs do this sort of thing just fine. I'm inclined to agree, although I think he'd add that certain people, like Fraser (his mention) or Gwynne Dyer (mine) will continue to thrive (for that matter, Andrew Coyne is in there too).  I mean certain columnists in the Toronto Star, like Linwood Barclay, are incomprehensible (what the hell is that Slinger guy on about? His column is meandering nonsense).

Coyne made the point that what he really valued was the comments on his writing. He wants to position it as an opportunity for 'rational' people to share their opinions (difficult as that may be).

Next session was about the future for media. Panelists included Rocketboom, AmberMac and Jian Ghomeshi. I thought Jian was the most impressive. His remarks about the 'cream of the crop rising to the top' make a lot of sense. After all, what is Rocketboom if not a really interesting channel?  The Rocketboom guy is a little too wrapped up in his success, I think. What he brings to the table is a good show.  This is enabled by new patterns of distribution (which do seem to seize control from the traditional producers) and cheap, quality technology (cameras and servers). He seemed to feel he was going to upset the traditional order. He never really answered Jian's question about a buy-out directly, I noticed. Of course they'd take the money.  And at that point, they are the mainstream media.  It's the age-old sell-out debate in new clothing. But again, I don't think their value proposition is in their indie-status. What they bring is a good show people enjoy.

I do still thing the long tail approach is fruitful. As Rocketboom mentioned, if you can get even 5000 people to pay 10$ a month, you're doing well. And his feeling was, well, you can pretty much find 5000 people to pay for *anything*.  So I think the potential for exciting niche shows is very high.
