---

comments: false
date: 2001-07-24 19:04:00+00:00
title: mizzletopf
---

Well I didn't feel like writing originally but it has a certain therapeutic effect for me so here we are. I have been really frustrated this year by being caught by illness just as I felt I was peaking for events and in personal fitness goals. I row for the second varsity team at the University of Victoria, and by the end of March I was really feeling great viz my strength. You see, for me rowing has been about improving myself physically, to match what I saw as a (more) complete mental, professional aspect of my life, with an improvement in my physical nature. So I suppose I started rowing so that I could get 'in shape' whatever that means. At any rate after 2 years of rowing full time I had lost weight and gained muscle, and I felt good about myself in that aspect. However, what I would see as the down side to this new pursuit of mine was that I was now associating myself with some individuals who trained at a much higher level than I was ever used to. Being a somewhat competitive person myself I felt the urge to match and better these others, some of whom had the advantage of having done the sport for a few years already. So I find myself, even now, caught in this conflict between wanting to row solely to keep in great shape, and the desire, I should say the innate desire, to win, to row at the highest level. For someone like myself, with interests, and, dare I say, strengths, in other pursuits, it can be tough to try and maintain  my goals for rowing. For instance, going to the gym and training on the stationary rowers is a big part of training. However, it is also one which I have not pursued as faithfully as I would like. Of course it is easy to set goals from the comfort of a bed or couch, like so many 'weekend warriors'. It is quite another to drag one's tired body over to the gym, for perhaps the 3rd workout of the day, and erg for an hour or two. And yet I believe it is this ability that sets the true athletes from the people like me, or like I have been: the people for whom training is somewhat important yet also something to be sacrificed if something else comes up. I won't deny my successes in other fields; certainly I have a lot to be proud of there. However, and perhaps this is my nature, whenever I pursue something I want desperately to be the best at it. Perhaps my problem is I want to be the best but not to have to do the work to get there.
