---

date: 2003-07-12 19:16:00+00:00
title: On the road in Ireland
---

These are thoughts transcribed from notes I wrote while touring Ireland:

Haven't written a diary for a while so far, but today has turned out to be a life experience.  I've made it from Dublin to the Knockree Youth Hostel in 6 hrs of hiking.  The hostel is a converted farmhouse, quaint and not oversupplied with amenities.  Seems my plan to do this hike fell drastically short on a few key details - namely what to eat in the middle of nowhere!  The other occupants are the hosts, Brendan, his? wife? and her brother (least, that's what I'm hoping the situation is!), and a strange family of Belgians.  There are 2 children, mid-teens, and two parents.  They arrived with very little on their backs, hiking the wrong way (if they were hiking the Way, anyhow).  To the east is Greater Sugarloaf, tall and impressive.  Below is the Glencree valley and rimmed by mountains.  Immediately across the road from me is a large field of sheep.  Down in the valley some 20-30 people have trekked to party and camp, with the occasional "BANG!" and a shout. No idea.  The hostel is somewhat dirty and unkempt - the table I'm writing on is super sticky - and not impressive except for the view.

The hike was very gruelling, largely because of the heavy load in my backpack.  I caught the bus - 48a - no problem, and it dripped me off a 10 minute walk from Marlay Park, where the Way officially begins.  Things started unassumingly, but after crossing the motorway, I was faced with a steep inclined road by which cars were passing.  Passed by some teens dressed as military men, I soon overtook them when one's outfit fell apart.  The hike continued by winding through a car park and up what I would term a fire-road - similar to the Galloping Goose.  This continued for a few hours, and there were few people around - a few walkers, some girls from the Netherlands hiking, a mountain biker.  After navigating the fiercely rocky slopes of the ridge of Two Stones mountain, I turned left up to the cairn.  Alone on top, with a fabulous view of Dublin and surroundings.  Met 2 nice ladies on the way down, one of whom was the spitting image of Peggy.  I continued my way along the ridge down the mountain toward the valley of ? Finally, I made it to the road which was rather unpleasant walking but nonetheless all right.  The pack had been getting heavier all along as I walked, although it was well adjusted for me.  I also was facing a shortage of water as once again I had underestimated the amount required on what seemed to be the hottest day of the year.  I also left a bottle on the bus which didn't help.  Made my way across the valley to the next ascent, passing a very friendly Irishman on the way.  It was here I made 2 wrong turns due to bad signage.  On the 2nd, I walked an extra 500 metres uphill.  Anyway, once on the right track, I tackled the last hill, yet another fire road into the sky.  At the top, a little more broken-field running along a ridge, and then a scrambly descent into the Glencree vale.  It was at this point that I started wondering what the hostel was like.  After some more road walking, I had my answer - no bar, no beer, no warm meal - just "Irish" soda bread, Nutella, and cheese, along with one banana and water for two meals.  Plus, I arrived at 3 (thirsty as hell!) and the place didn't open until 5!  Jeez.  The belgian guy is eating yoghurt in the most irritating way possible right now.

Tomorrow, I'm skipping the hiking - pack is too heavy for this and I don't have a good source of H20.  I've reserved a room in Bray, near the coast, for 90 Euro a night, from which I can get to the airport quite easily.  Now hopefully the strike isn't starting yet....

All in all, a good hike, if repetitive, but the weather was awesome!
