---

date: 2003-02-20 23:25:00+00:00
layout: post
title: Day 2/3
---

Here are some details on what I did on the second day there.

This morning I talked with Fred, the workflow manager. He assigns the tasks (new concepts to be edited) and resolves conflicts. He stepped me through the process he has for doing this, pointed out some flaws in the tool, explained the use of the classifier. Let me explain this a little as it helped my understanding a lot as well. The individual modellers create and edit concepts, what we call classes, by associating properties (simple data slots such as string and number) and roles (instance and class slots) with the concept. When they consider this to be a complete definition, according to their internal criteria as scientists in the field, they mark it complete and send it to Fred. Fred then does a weekly 'build' on the entire baseline + changes and resolves any conflicts that arise (say, someone moved a concept another person was using as a range for a role relation). He then exports this baseline to XML as a defined file - this is the file available for download on the NCICB site as the EVS. Defined merely refers to the fact that every concept has been explicitly stated. He then imports the ontology as a new baseline for everyone to use, and also classifies it. The classification does two things: one, it moves the classes around based on the properties (assigns new parents that it could also have) and secondly, infers roles that could exist in the children based on the inheritance hierarchy. This classified version is called the inferred version and is approx. 5% larger than the defined one. It is not able to be exported for some Apelon-reason.

I then met with Gilberto and got more technical details about what the APIs for EVS are, how they are constructing a new history table that will log when, who, what, and why changes are made to the EVS. He provided a lot of information and is very accessible. I think Dave may want to look into this for visualizing changes.

Finally, I met with the SAIC people who are constructing the myCaBIO project and asked them what they are up to. They don't have a good grasp of what our tool is about, but seem very excited about some of the possibilities for using visualization to simplify query and browsing the object model. I have a better idea how to do this now which I need to write-up and send off to our little mini team of Jeff and Rob and you. There were 5 of them and some tough questions asked so it was a little intimidating, but I think we see what each other do now. Tomorrow is the last day so tonight I am writing my notes down and trying to grok what has happened so far... in case any other questions arise.
