---

date: 2006-05-17 02:51:48+00:00
layout: post
title: Mesh day 2
---

Last day of the mesh conference. Now, it may be that as an academic I don't have a natural appreciation for business and making money (a sentiment I reject, btw). Today, the sessions were simply not as appealing. The focus was on advertising and marketing.

My personal feeling about marketing is that it's only a good thing when it's working for you, e.g. you own a company and it's generating sales. On the recipient side I find marketing and PR obnoxious and intrusive.  The keynotes today (all I could stay for) were like attending a church event where the dominant ideology was capitalism. No, don't get me wrong. I'm not in favour of state intervention, or regulating advertising, or anything like that. I just resent the constant focus that society seems to place on the ['getting and spending'](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/wordsworth.html).

First up was Steve Rubel. Steve seemed to really get the power of new technologies like blogs, wikis, etc. to change the way PR and marketing are done. Certainly someone I'd want on my company's staff if I was running a campaign.

After Steve was Paul Kedrovsky, a VC from Silicon Valley. Paul is what one might call a 'straight-shooter'. Memorable comment, regarding the possibility of a Web 2.0 bubble, was "we need dead bodies to fill in the swamp". I gather what he means by this is the notion that a VC essentially has very little sense for what company is going to do well in the corporate portfolio. In this, they seem closely aligned with the [randomness theory of markets](http://www.fooledbyrandomness.com/).

Another point was that it may be that the days of VCs insisting on a reasonably clear business model are passing. Not that they will take a flyer on any old service. Rather, the community seems to realize that certain businesses define their models after they build a user base; witness Google, Skype, MySpace. These are businesses that really relied on building scale and mindshare before completely understanding how they would become profitable.

The final point I picked out was the notion that while yes, it is possible to go a long way with no funding given the current platforms and tools, that also means that you will have a factor of 10 more competition for that good idea. And furthermore, there is a sense that the VC money can really help after a certain point. You don't want to be desperate when you seek financing.

Last up was Tara Hunt. First of all, anyone who uses a [picture of Che](http://flickr.com/photos/neilernst/147942030/) even half-seriously immediately loses credibility in my mind. It demonstrates that you cannot come up with your own 'brand', and shows a serious ignorance of history.

Tara started off by showing a series of slides demonstrating how fed up people were with advertising and media. _Amen,_ I silently thought. But whereas I wondered, _maybe she'll try to convince people that blogging is about more than marketing_, she took the opposite lesson. Since the 'old ways' are annoying people, that means we must embrace (and extend) the new ways. She, and the sympathetic audience, went on for a while discussing how to 'have a conversation' with your customers, how to insert yourself into a community, etc.  Probably all good ideas for marketing in today's age.

But I'm left with the Wordsworth poem. Must every new idea and technology be subverted, perverted really, by those who just want to sell me something? Maybe I'm overblowing this, but the fatigue and annoyance I have with old-school commerce -- the crappy commercials, the shitty television -- isn't changing because you want a conversation now. Ultimately it all comes down to pushing product. You want dollars for your widget, and you need to convince me to give my dollars up.  **I don't want your widget!** If I do, I'll seek you out.

Here was what I wrote as part of Tara's exercise on notecards:


<blockquote>You are just another cog in the capitalist gearworks. And only a cog.</blockquote>


On the whole, I thought it was a great conference. It wasn't right up my alley, but I really enjoyed the venue, the enthusiasm of the attendees, and the food. The format worked quite well too - much more interactive than I'd thought. But then, I'm used to some pretty boring 'sage on the stage' routines in academia.
